Add compute lab (#8)
open-education-hub/operating-systems: content/chapters/compute/lab/README.md

# Compute

The main criterion we use to rank CPUs is their _computation power_, i.e. their ability to crunch numbers and do math.
Numerous benchmarks exist out there and they are publicly displayed on websites such as [CPUBenchmark](https://www.cpubenchmark.net/).

> This benchmark measures the performance of the computer's CPU in a variety of scenarios:

Author: It explains what is being measured as part of a benchmark to get a better idea about what a CPU does adn why there is a need for an OS. All in all, it's less than 15 lines and then moves on introduce the OS. I don't think it's so elaborate, especially since the links aren't menat to be analysed in detail, but merely skimmed over.

> This benchmark measures the performance of the computer's CPU in a variety of scenarios:

Reviewer: OK, you can keep it. My concern is that it focuses on benchmarking and results which may be too much for students at this point to grasp.

CPU(s):                          8
```
We have 7 more cores waiting to add numbers in our array.

![What if we used 100% of the CPU?](./media/100-percent-cpu.jpeg)

What if we use 7 more processes between which we spread the task of adding the numbers in this array?
If we split the array into several equal parts and designate a separate process to calculate the sum of each part, we should get a speedup because now the work performed by each individual process is reduced.

Let's take it methodically.
Compile and run `sum_array_processes.d` using 1, 2, 4 and 8 processes respectively.
Note the running times for each number of processes.
We expect the speedups compared to our reference run to be 1, 2, 4 and 8 respectively, right?

[Quiz](./quiz/processes-speedup.md)

You most likely did get some speedup, especially when using 8 processes.
Now we will try to improve this speedup by using **threads** instead.

### Threads

Compile the code in `sum_array_threads.d` and run it using 1, 2, 4 and 8 threads as you did before.
Each thread runs the `calculateArrayPartSum` function and then finishes.
Running times should be _slightly_ smaller than the implementation using processes.

> The reason is that the time required to create a process is longer than that required to create a thread.

Author: I said above that the difference should be small. Should I remove this paragraph or rephrase it?

> The reason is that the time required to create a process is longer than that required to create a thread.

Reviewer: I see. I would remove the blank line between them. Also, I would rephrase it to "This slight time difference is caused by process creation actions, which are costlier than thread creation actions." Or something in that note.

Because a process needs a separate virtual address space (VAS) and needs to duplicate some internal structures such as the file descriptor table and page table, it takes the operating system more time to create it than to create a thread.
On the other hand, threads belonging to the same process share the same VAS and, implicitly, the same OS-internal structures.
Therefore, they are more lightweight than processes.

#### Libraries for Parallel Processing

Our previous implementation spawned the worker threads "manually" by using the `spawn` function.

> This is **not** a syscall, but a wrapper over the most common thread-management API in Linuxs: POSIX Threads or `pthreads`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is **not** a syscall, but a wrapper over the most common thread-management API in POSIX-based operating systems (such as Linux, FreeBSD, macOS): POSIX Threads or `pthreads`.
```

As we've already established, we're only interested in the `clone` syscall:
```
student@os:~/.../lab/support/sum-array/d/$ strace -e clone ./sum_array_threads 2
clone(child_stack=0x7f60b56482b0, flags=CLONE_VM|CLONE_FS|CLONE_FILES|CLONE_SIGHAND|CLONE_THREAD|CLONE_SYSVSEM|CLONE_SETTLS|CLONE_PARENT_SETTID|CLONE_CHILD_CLEARTID, parent_tid=[1819693], tls=0x7f60b5649640, child_tidptr=0x7f60b5649910) = 1819693
clone(child_stack=0x7f60b4e472b0, flags=CLONE_VM|CLONE_FS|CLONE_FILES|CLONE_SIGHAND|CLONE_THREAD|CLONE_SYSVSEM|CLONE_SETTLS|CLONE_PARENT_SETTID|CLONE_CHILD_CLEARTID, parent_tid=[1819694], tls=0x7f60b4e48640, child_tidptr=0x7f60b4e48910) = 1819694

student@os:~/.../lab/support/sum-array/d/$ strace -e clone ./sum_array_processes 2
clone(child_stack=NULL, flags=CLONE_CHILD_CLEARTID|CLONE_CHILD_SETTID|SIGCHLD, child_tidptr=0x7f7a4e346650) = 1820599
clone(child_stack=NULL, flags=CLONE_CHILD_CLEARTID|CLONE_CHILD_SETTID|SIGCHLD, child_tidptr=0x7f7a4e346650) = 1820600
```

We ran each program with an argument of 2, so we have 2 calls to `clone`.
Notice that in the case of threads, then `clone` syscall receives more arguments.

> If we check [`clone`'s man page](https://man.archlinux.org/man/clone3.2.en) `flags` it receives specify the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Relevant flags passed as arguments when creating threads are documented in [`clone`'s man page](https://man.archlinux.org/man/clone3.2.en):
```

- `CLONE_VM`: the child and the parent process share the same VAS
- `CLONE_{FS,FILES,SIGHAND}`: the new thread shares the filesystem information, file and signal handlers with the one that created it

> The syscall also receives valid pointers to the new thread's stack and TLS, i.e. the only parts of the VAS that are distinct between threads (although they are technically accessible from all threads).

Reviewer: This is a rather out-of-nowhere reference to TLS. I assume it will be detailed sometime in the lab text.

Author: Yes. I think this is alright since this section comes at the end of the "regular" lab.

By contrast, when creating a new process the `clone` syscall receives far less information.
Remember that in both cases `clone` creates a new **thread**.

> When creating a process, `clone` creates this new thread within a separate process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating a process, `clone` creates this new thread within a new separate address space.
The creation of a new address space and a new thread equates to the creation of a new process.
```

) = 86
close(1)                                = 0
close(2)                                = 0
exit_group(0)                           = ?
+++ exited with 0 +++
```
Look at its parameters:
- the path to the **program**: `/usr/bin/ls`
- the list of arguments: `"ls", "-a"`
- the enivronment variables: the rest of the syscall's arguments

`execve` invokes the loader to create the `ls` process.
All subsequent syscalls are performed by the newly spawned `ls` process.
We will get into more details regarding `execve` [towards the end of this lab](#TODO-section).

TODO - image: creation of a process - loader

## Sum of the Elements in an Array

Let's assume we only have one process on our system and that process knows how to add the numbers in an array.
It can use however many resources it wants since there is no other process to contest it.
It would probabily look like the code in `support/sum-array/d/sum_array_sequential.d`.
The program also measures the time spent computing the sum.
Let's compile and run it:

```
student@os:~/.../lab/support/sum-array/d/$

> 

Author: No, it was only a duplicate line

Spawn a thread that executes the `negateArray()` function.
For now, do not wait for it to finish; simply start it.

Compile the code and run the resulting executable several times.
See that the negative numbers appear from different indices.
This is precisely the nondeterminism that we talked about [in the previous section](#practice-wait-for-me).

Now wait for that thread to finish and see that all the printed numbers are consistently negative.

As you can see, waiting is a very coarse form of synchronisation.
If we only use waiting, we can expect no speedup as a result of parallelism, because one thread must finish completely before another can continue.
We will discuss more fine-grained synchronisation mechanisms [later in this lab](#synchronisation).

Also, at this point, you might be wondering why this exercise is written in D, while [the same exercise, but with processes](#practice-wait-for-me) was written in Python.
There is a very good reason for this and has to do with how threads are synchronized by default in Python.
You can find out what this is about [in the Arena section](#the-gil), after you have completed the [Synchronisation section](#synchronisation).

> #### Practice: `fork()`

Author: It is a problem. I moved it after `Practice: Wait for Me!`.

#### Memory Corruption

Because they share the same address space,  threads run the risk of corrupting each other's data.
Take a look at the code in `support/sum-array-bugs/memory-corruption/python/`.
The two programs only differ in how they spread their workload.
One uses threads while the other uses processes.

Run both programs.
The one using threads will most likely print a negative sum, while the other displays the correct sum.
This happens because all threads refer the same memory for the array `arr`.
What happens to the processes is a bit more complicated.
[Later in this lab](#copy-on-write) we will see that initially, the page tables of all processes point to the same physical frames or `arr`.
When the malicious process tries to corrupt this array by **writing data to it**, the OS duplicates the original frames of `arr` so that the malicious process writes the corrupted values to these new frames, while leaving the original ones untouched.
This mechanism is called **Copy-on-Write** and is an OS optimisation so that memory is shared between the parent and the child process, until one of them attempts to write to it.

> At this point, this process receives its own separate copies of the previously shared frames.

Author: Right. I only left a forward reference to copy-on-write to make students curious.

But should **all** the PAS of the parent be distinct from that of the child?
What about some read-only memory sections, such as `.text` and `.rodata`?
And what about the heap, where the child _may_ use some data previously written by the parent and then override it with its own data.

The answer to all of these questions is a core mechanism of multi-process operating systems called **Copy-on-Write**.
It works according to one very simple principle:
> The VAS of the child process initially points to the same PAS as that of the parent.
> A (physical) frame is only duplicated by the child when it attempts to **write** data to it.

This ensures that read-only sections remain shared, while writable sections are shared as long as their contents remain unchanged.
When changes happen, the process making the change receives a unique frame as a modified copy of the original frame _on demand_.

In the image below we have the state of the child and parent processes right after `fork()` returns in both of them.
See how each has its own VAS, both of them being mapped to (mostly) the same PAS.

> ![Copy-on-Write](../lecture/media/copy-on-write-initial.svg)

Author: It is present in the [lecture PR](https://github.com/systems-cs-pub-ro/operating-systems-oer/pull/5). Once that is merged, it should render properly. There's no point in duplicating it.

The relevant flags passed as arguments when creating threads are documented in [`clone`'s man page](https://man.archlinux.org/man/clone3.2.en):
- `CLONE_VM`: the child and the parent process share the same VAS
- `CLONE_{FS,FILES,SIGHAND}`: the new thread shares the filesystem information, file and signal handlers with the one that created it
The syscall also receives valid pointers to the new thread's stack and TLS, i.e. the only parts of the VAS that are distinct between threads (although they are technically accessible from all threads).

By contrast, when creating a new process, the arguments of the `clone` syscall are simpler (i.e. fewer flags are present).
Remember that in both cases `clone` creates a new **thread**.
When creating a process, `clone` creates this new thread within a new separate address space.

### Libraries for Parallel Processing

In `support/sum-array/d/sum_array_threads.d` we spawned threads "manually" by using the `spawn` function.
This is **not** a syscall, but a wrapper over the most common thread-management API in POSIX-based operating systems (such as Linux, FreeBSD, macOS): POSIX Threads or `pthreads`.

> Using `ltrace`, we can see that `spawn` calls `pthread_create` in order to spawn the new thread.

Author: The scheduler itself also creates some additional threads, the output from `ltrace` is messy at best. I've just linked the implementation of `spawn`. It should be clearer.

> [Remember](#threads-and-processes-clone) what `clone()` is used for and use its parameters to deduce which of the two scenarios happens to `sleepy`. 

**Moral of the story**: We can add another step to the moral of [our previous story](#practice-fork).
When spawning a new command, the call order is:
- parent: `fork()`, `exec()`, `wait()`
- child: `exit()`

#### Command Executor in Another language

Now implement the same functionality (a Bash command executor) in any other language, other than C/C++.
Use whatever API is provided by your language of choice for creating and waiting for processes.

### The GIL

Throughout this lab you might have noticed that there were no thread exercises _in Python_.
If you did, you probably wondered why.
It's not because Python does not support threads, because it does, but because of a mechanism called the **Global Interpreter Lock**, or GIL.
As its name suggests, this is a lock implemented inside most commonly used Python interpreter (CPython), which only allows **one** thread to run at a given time.
As a consequence, multithreaded programs written in Python run **concurrently**, not in parallel.

> For this reason, you will see no speedup even when you run an embarrassingly parallel code in parallel.

Reviewer 2: It should be mentioned that python threads are still useful when you have multiple io-bound tasks. Otherwise one would believe that they are completely useless.

If your system only has 4 cores ([hyperthreading](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/gaming/resources/hyper-threading.html) included), limit your runs to 4 processes.
Note the running times for each number of processes.
We expect the speedups compared to our reference run to be 1, 2, 4 and 8 respectively, right?

[Quiz](./quiz/processes-speedup.md)

You most likely did get some speedup, especially when using 8 processes.
Now we will try to improve this speedup by using **threads** instead.

Also notice that we're not using hundreds or thousands of processes.
Assuming our system has 8 cores, only 8 _threads_ (we'll see this later in the lab) can run at the same time.
In general, **the maximum number of threads that can run at the same time is equal to the number of cores**.
In our example, each process only has one thread: its main thread.
So by consequence and by forcing the terminology (because it's the main thread of these processes that is running, not the processes themselves), we can only run in parallel a number of processes equal to at most the number of cores.

#### Practice: Baby steps - Python

> Run the code in `support/create-process/popen.py`.

Author: The point of this exercise is to teach students how to use `Popen()` so they can do so themselves in the next exercise.

> Run the code in `support/create-process/popen.py`.

Author: You're right. I've added a few phrases regarding this in the lab text.

- Quiz?

### User-Level vs Kernel-Level Threads

There are two types of threads.
The threads you've used so far are **kernel-level threads (KLT)**.
They are created and scheduled in the kernel of the OS.
One of the most important of their features is that they offer true parallelism.
With KLTs, we can truly run a program on all the cores of our CPU at once.
But we must pay a price for this: scheduling them is very complex and context switches are costly (in terms of time), especially when switching threads belonging to different processes. 

By contrast, **user-level threads (ULT)** are managed by the user space.
More of the ULTs created by a program are generally mapped to the same kernel thread.
If a process only creates ULTs, then they will all be mapped to the single, main kernel thread of the process.
So if we cannot run code in parallel with ULTs, then why use them?
Well, for I/O-intensive programs (those that do lots of network calls or file operations like reads and writes - web servers are a good example), threads are expected to perform lots of blocking calls, which causes context switches.

> In such cases, user-level threads may be useful as context switches bring less overhead between user-level threads.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if this is correct? If a user-level thread does a blocking io call, none of the other user-level threads can run.

Author: Yeah, you're right. I changed the use case to something more generic: "more context switches => ULTs are better".
